Traditional databases (referred to as relational databases) store information as tables, with a table containing a list of entries as its rows and storing attributes as the column.This works well for structured data, such as a list of employees. Each employee would be a row in an Employee table and may have information such as name or data of birth as the columns. However, it would be difficult to store and query data such as images or documents. 
Unstructured data such as images or documents may differ in how they convey information. For example, the format of a financial report may differ from company to company. Tables in the document or written content will be hard to search through. Unstructured data needs to be turned into structured pieces of data to effectively store and query. 
AI models specifically tailored to a type of unstructured data can embed data into a vector (an array of numbers) while still keeping the semantic meaning of the data. This would mean that if we were to split up financial reports into chunks, the sections talking about CEO compensation would be embedded into vectors that would be very similar. As a result of an AI model, embedding unstructured data can keep its semantic meaning while turning it into a workable data structure. 
Vector databases are built from the ground up to store these vector embeddings along with the original content of the data. They use algorithms that perform an Approximate Nearest Neighbour (ANN) search to retrieve the vectors most similar to the query. For example, I could query a vector database filled with financial reports with "CEO salary".  The embedding model would turn it into a vector and the vector database uses this to search for similar vectors. It would return vectors most similar to the query provided.  
This differs from relational databases where the search results that match exactly to the query. They also differ from vector search plugins as they are specifically built to store and handle unstructured data instead of applying similarity searching on top of a traditional database. 